README.md, before:

[![Build Status][ci-img]][ci] [![Released Version][maven-img]][maven]

# Span manager for Java

:heavy_exclamation_mark: **Warning:** This library is still a work in progress!  
Please watch pull-request [#115 in opentracing-java](https://github.com/opentracing/opentracing-java/pull/115) for progress 
on inclusion in the standard Java OpenTracing libraries.

This library provides a way to manage spans and propagate them to other threads.

## SpanManager

Defines _current span_ management.

A SpanManager separates the creation of a `Span` from its use later on.
This relieves application developers from passing the current span around through their code.
Only tracing-related code will need access to a SpanManager reference, provided as an ordinary dependency.

SpanManager provides the following methods:

 1. `activate(span)` makes the given span the _current_ managed span.  
    Returns a `ManagedSpan` containing a `deactivate()` method
    to later 'unmanage' the span with.
 2. `current()` returns the _current_ `ManagedSpan`,
    or an empty managed span object without a `Span` if no span is activated.
 3. `clear()` provides unconditional cleanup of _all managed spans_ for the current process.

## DefaultSpanManager

A _default_ SpanManager maintaining a `Stack`-like `ThreadLocal` storage of _linked managed spans_.

Deactivating a _linked managed span_ uses the following algorithm:
 1. If the deactivated span is not the _current_ span, the current span is left alone.
 2. Otherwise, the first parent that is <em>not yet deactivated</em> is set as the new current span.
 3. If no current parents remain, the current span is cleared.
 4. Consecutive `deactivate()` calls for already-deactivated spans will be ignored.

## Concurrency

### SpanPropagatingExecutorService

This `ExecutorService` _propagates the current span_ 
from the caller into each call that is executed.  
The current span of the caller is obtained from the configured `SpanManager`.

_Please note:_ The current span is merely _propagated into the background thread_ (as-is).  
It is explicitly **not** finished when the calls end,
nor will new spans be automatically related to the propagated span.

## ManagedSpanTracer

This convenience `Tracer` automates managing the _current span_:
 1. It wraps another `Tracer`.
 2. `Spans` created with this tracer are:
    - automatically _activated_ when started, and
    - automatically _deactivated_ when finished.

## Examples

### Manually propagating any Span into a background thread

To propagate a `Span` into a new `Thread`, the _current_ Span from the caller must be
remembered by the `Runnable`:

```java
    class ExampleRunnable implements Runnable {
        private final SpanManager spanManager;
        private final Span currentSpanFromCaller;
        
        ExampleRunnable(SpanManager spanManager) {
            this(spanManager, NoopSpan.INSTANCE);
        }
        
        private ExampleRunnable(SpanManager spanManager, Span currentSpanFromCaller) {
            this.spanManager = spanManager;
            this.currentSpanFromCaller = currentSpanFromCaller;
        }
        
        ExampleRunnable withCurrentSpan() {
            return new ExampleRunnable(spanManager, spanManager.currentSpan());
        }
        
        @Override
        public void run() {
            try (ManagedSpan parent = spanManager.activate(currentSpanFromCaller)) {

                // Any background code that requires tracing
                // and may use spanManager.current().getSpan()
                
            } // parent.deactivate() restores spanManager.current()
        }
    }
```

Then the application can propagate this _current_ Span into background threads:

```java
    class App {
        public static void main(String... args) throws InterruptedException {
            Config config = ...;
            Tracer tracer = config.getTracer();
            SpanManager spanManager = config.getSpanManager();
            ExampleRunnable runnable = new ExampleRunnable(spanManager);

            try (Span appSpan = tracer.buildSpan("main").start();           // start appSpan
                    ManagedSpan managed = spanManager.activate(appSpan)) {  // update current Span
            
                Thread example = new Thread(runnable.withCurrentSpan());
                example.start();
                example.join();
                
            } // managed.deactivate() + appSpan.finish()
            
            System.exit(0);
        }
    }

```

### Threadpool that propagates SpanManager.current().getSpan() into threads

```java
    class TracedCall implements Callable<String> {
        SpanManager spanManager = ... // inject or DefaultSpanManager.getInstance();
        
        @Override
        public String call() {
            Span currentSpan = spanManager.current().getSpan(); // Propagated span from caller
            // ...
        }
    }

    class Caller {
        SpanManager spanManager = ... // inject or DefaultSpanManager.getInstance(); 
        ExecutorService threadpool = new SpanPropagatingExecutorService(anyThreadpool(), spanManager);

        void run() {
            // ...code that sets the current Span somewhere:
            try (ManagedSpan current = spanManager.activate(someSpan)) {
                
                // scheduling the traced call:
                Future<String> result = threadpool.submit(new TracedCall());
                
            }
        }
    }

```

### Propagating threadpool with 'ManagedSpan' Tracer

When starting a new span and making it the _current_ Span, the manual example above used:
```java
    try (Span span = tracer.buildSpan("main").start();           // start span
            ManagedSpan managed = spanManager.activate(span)) {  // update current Span
        // ...traced block of code...
    }
```

The `ManagedSpanTracer` automatically makes every started span the current span.
It also deactivates it again when the span is finished:

```java
    class Caller {
        SpanManager spanManager = ... // inject or DefaultSpanManager.getInstance();
        Tracer tracer = new ManagedSpanTracer(anyTracer(), spanManager);
        ExecutorService threadpool = new SpanPropagatingExecutorService(anyThreadpool(), spanManager);

        void run() {
            try (Span parent = tracer.buildSpan("parentOperation").start()) { // parent == current Span
            
                // Scheduling the traced call:
                Future<String> result = threadpool.submit(new TracedCall());
                
            } // parent.finish() + ((ManagedSpan) parent).deactivate()
        }
    }
```

### Example with asynchronous request / response filters

When asynchronous processing is handled by separate request/response filters,
a `try-with-resources` code block is insufficient.

Existing filters that start / finish new spans asynchronously can simply 
be supplied with the `ManagedSpanTracer` around the existing tracer.
This sets the _current_ Span from the request filter
and calls `deactivate()` automatically from the response filter
when the existing filter finishes the span.  
An example would be using the [opentracing jaxrs filters](https://github.com/opentracing-contrib/java-jaxrs) 
in combination with the ManagedSpanTracer:
```java
    // Add example when opentracing jaxrs library stabilizes
```

Alternatively, the following hypothetic filter pair could be used on an asynchronous server:  
Handling the request:
```java
    final SpanManager spanManager = ... // inject or DefaultSpanManager.getInstance();
    void onRequest(RequestContext reqCtx) {
        Span span = ... // either obtain Span from previous filter or start from the request
        ManagedSpan managedSpan = spanManager.activate(span); // span is now current Span.
        reqCtx.put(SOMEKEY, managedSpan);
    }
```

For the response:
```java
    final SpanManager spanManager = ...
    void onResponse(RequestContext reqCtx, ResponseContext resCtx) {
        spanManager.clear(); // Clear stack containing the current Span if this is a boundary-filter
        // or: 
        // ManagedSpan managedSpan = reqCtx.get(SOMEKEY);
        // managedSpan.deactivate();
        
        // If the corresponding request filter starts a span, don't forget to call span.finish() here!
    }
```

  [ci-img]: https://img.shields.io/travis/opentracing-contrib/java-spanmanager/master.svg
  [ci]: https://travis-ci.org/opentracing-contrib/java-spanmanager
  [maven-img]: https://img.shields.io/maven-central/v/io.opentracing.contrib/opentracing-spanmanager.svg
  [maven]: http://search.maven.org/#search%7Cga%7C1%7Copentracing-spanmanager

Commit message:

Refer to the 'clean copy' PR in opentracing.
As that may be easier to read for people 'diving in'.

README.md, after:

[![Build Status][ci-img]][ci] [![Released Version][maven-img]][maven]

# Span manager for Java

:heavy_exclamation_mark: **Warning:** This library is still a work in progress!  
Please watch pull-request [#115 in opentracing-java](https://github.com/opentracing/opentracing-java/pull/115) ([or clean copy #127 with less comments](https://github.com/opentracing/opentracing-java/pull/127)) for progress 
on inclusion in the standard Java OpenTracing libraries.

This library provides a way to manage spans and propagate them to other threads.

## SpanManager

Defines _current span_ management.

A SpanManager separates the creation of a `Span` from its use later on.
This relieves application developers from passing the current span around through their code.
Only tracing-related code will need access to a SpanManager reference, provided as an ordinary dependency.

SpanManager provides the following methods:

 1. `activate(span)` makes the given span the _current_ managed span.  
    Returns a `ManagedSpan` containing a `deactivate()` method
    to later 'unmanage' the span with.
 2. `current()` returns the _current_ `ManagedSpan`,
    or an empty managed span object without a `Span` if no span is activated.
 3. `clear()` provides unconditional cleanup of _all managed spans_ for the current process.

## DefaultSpanManager

A _default_ SpanManager maintaining a `Stack`-like `ThreadLocal` storage of _linked managed spans_.

Deactivating a _linked managed span_ uses the following algorithm:
 1. If the deactivated span is not the _current_ span, the current span is left alone.
 2. Otherwise, the first parent that is <em>not yet deactivated</em> is set as the new current span.
 3. If no current parents remain, the current span is cleared.
 4. Consecutive `deactivate()` calls for already-deactivated spans will be ignored.

## Concurrency

### SpanPropagatingExecutorService

This `ExecutorService` _propagates the current span_ 
from the caller into each call that is executed.  
The current span of the caller is obtained from the configured `SpanManager`.

_Please note:_ The current span is merely _propagated into the background thread_ (as-is).  
It is explicitly **not** finished when the calls end,
nor will new spans be automatically related to the propagated span.

## ManagedSpanTracer

This convenience `Tracer` automates managing the _current span_:
 1. It wraps another `Tracer`.
 2. `Spans` created with this tracer are:
    - automatically _activated_ when started, and
    - automatically _deactivated_ when finished.

## Examples

### Manually propagating any Span into a background thread

To propagate a `Span` into a new `Thread`, the _current_ Span from the caller must be
remembered by the `Runnable`:

```java
    class ExampleRunnable implements Runnable {
        private final SpanManager spanManager;
        private final Span currentSpanFromCaller;
        
        ExampleRunnable(SpanManager spanManager) {
            this(spanManager, NoopSpan.INSTANCE);
        }
        
        private ExampleRunnable(SpanManager spanManager, Span currentSpanFromCaller) {
            this.spanManager = spanManager;
            this.currentSpanFromCaller = currentSpanFromCaller;
        }
        
        ExampleRunnable withCurrentSpan() {
            return new ExampleRunnable(spanManager, spanManager.currentSpan());
        }
        
        @Override
        public void run() {
            try (ManagedSpan parent = spanManager.activate(currentSpanFromCaller)) {

                // Any background code that requires tracing
                // and may use spanManager.current().getSpan()
                
            } // parent.deactivate() restores spanManager.current()
        }
    }
```

Then the application can propagate this _current_ Span into background threads:

```java
    class App {
        public static void main(String... args) throws InterruptedException {
            Config config = ...;
            Tracer tracer = config.getTracer();
            SpanManager spanManager = config.getSpanManager();
            ExampleRunnable runnable = new ExampleRunnable(spanManager);

            try (Span appSpan = tracer.buildSpan("main").start();           // start appSpan
                    ManagedSpan managed = spanManager.activate(appSpan)) {  // update current Span
            
                Thread example = new Thread(runnable.withCurrentSpan());
                example.start();
                example.join();
                
            } // managed.deactivate() + appSpan.finish()
            
            System.exit(0);
        }
    }

```

### Threadpool that propagates SpanManager.current().getSpan() into threads

```java
    class TracedCall implements Callable<String> {
        SpanManager spanManager = ... // inject or DefaultSpanManager.getInstance();
        
        @Override
        public String call() {
            Span currentSpan = spanManager.current().getSpan(); // Propagated span from caller
            // ...
        }
    }

    class Caller {
        SpanManager spanManager = ... // inject or DefaultSpanManager.getInstance(); 
        ExecutorService threadpool = new SpanPropagatingExecutorService(anyThreadpool(), spanManager);

        void run() {
            // ...code that sets the current Span somewhere:
            try (ManagedSpan current = spanManager.activate(someSpan)) {
                
                // scheduling the traced call:
                Future<String> result = threadpool.submit(new TracedCall());
                
            }
        }
    }

```

### Propagating threadpool with 'ManagedSpan' Tracer

When starting a new span and making it the _current_ Span, the manual example above used:
```java
    try (Span span = tracer.buildSpan("main").start();           // start span
            ManagedSpan managed = spanManager.activate(span)) {  // update current Span
        // ...traced block of code...
    }
```

The `ManagedSpanTracer` automatically makes every started span the current span.
It also deactivates it again when the span is finished:

```java
    class Caller {
        SpanManager spanManager = ... // inject or DefaultSpanManager.getInstance();
        Tracer tracer = new ManagedSpanTracer(anyTracer(), spanManager);
        ExecutorService threadpool = new SpanPropagatingExecutorService(anyThreadpool(), spanManager);

        void run() {
            try (Span parent = tracer.buildSpan("parentOperation").start()) { // parent == current Span
            
                // Scheduling the traced call:
                Future<String> result = threadpool.submit(new TracedCall());
                
            } // parent.finish() + ((ManagedSpan) parent).deactivate()
        }
    }
```

### Example with asynchronous request / response filters

When asynchronous processing is handled by separate request/response filters,
a `try-with-resources` code block is insufficient.

Existing filters that start / finish new spans asynchronously can simply 
be supplied with the `ManagedSpanTracer` around the existing tracer.
This sets the _current_ Span from the request filter
and calls `deactivate()` automatically from the response filter
when the existing filter finishes the span.  
An example would be using the [opentracing jaxrs filters](https://github.com/opentracing-contrib/java-jaxrs) 
in combination with the ManagedSpanTracer:
```java
    // Add example when opentracing jaxrs library stabilizes
```

Alternatively, the following hypothetic filter pair could be used on an asynchronous server:  
Handling the request:
```java
    final SpanManager spanManager = ... // inject or DefaultSpanManager.getInstance();
    void onRequest(RequestContext reqCtx) {
        Span span = ... // either obtain Span from previous filter or start from the request
        ManagedSpan managedSpan = spanManager.activate(span); // span is now current Span.
        reqCtx.put(SOMEKEY, managedSpan);
    }
```

For the response:
```java
    final SpanManager spanManager = ...
    void onResponse(RequestContext reqCtx, ResponseContext resCtx) {
        spanManager.clear(); // Clear stack containing the current Span if this is a boundary-filter
        // or: 
        // ManagedSpan managedSpan = reqCtx.get(SOMEKEY);
        // managedSpan.deactivate();
        
        // If the corresponding request filter starts a span, don't forget to call span.finish() here!
    }
```

  [ci-img]: https://img.shields.io/travis/opentracing-contrib/java-spanmanager/master.svg
  [ci]: https://travis-ci.org/opentracing-contrib/java-spanmanager
  [maven-img]: https://img.shields.io/maven-central/v/io.opentracing.contrib/opentracing-spanmanager.svg
  [maven]: http://search.maven.org/#search%7Cga%7C1%7Copentracing-spanmanager
